---
title: >-
  Learn about asynchronous communication: why phone is bad and chat is good
abstract: |
  This post tries to explain the rationale behind one of my recent tweets: Phone is bad, Chat is good.
date: 2015-06-28
---

This post tries to explain the rationale behind one of
[my recent tweets](https://twitter.com/coderbyheart/status/612577493594284032):

> Everyone will work better if all understand the difference between sync and
> async communication: **Phone is bad, Chat is good.** >
> [#futureofwork](https://twitter.com/hashtag/futureofwork?src=hash)

---

You can maximize your work output if you can use your work time in a way the
suits your habits best. The more your work requires your undivided attention,
which is true especially for creative and innovative work, the more your mind
will submerge into something called _flow_, a state of mind that shuts out all
exterior disturbances and focuses on the one task at hand. I call this the core
working time, that part of the day which is dedicated to the work that you are
best doing at.

## _flow_ needs an environment of self-determination and independence to happen

There are two important things to consider:  
_Flow can't be switched on_ just like that, you need the environment and the
personal condition to activate it. It's a very individual condition that is
entirely up to you and can't be determined by putting you in a cubicle from 9 to
5 with motivational posters around. You are in charge of picking the time of a
day and the location that provide the best conditions for you to be able to do
_your best work possible_.  
_It takes time_ for your brain to enter a higher state of concentration that
enables you to _see_ all the factors of a problem and _understand_ patterns that
emerge-only then will you be able to find a good solution to a given problem.
It's a matter of hours and not minutes until you can focus all your senses on a
problem.

If you work at an organization where innovation and creativity is key to your
organization's success you want everyone to reach their _flow_ at least once a
day. But as I pointed out before, it can't be planned nor can it be mandated.
_flow_ needs an environment of self-determination and independence to happen.

## Phone calls are poison in these environment

Every time you pick up your phone to call a colleague you have a very high
probability of disturbing their flow and yanking them out of their core working
time. Why is that? You will force their mind to step out of its current
engagement and refocus on the question you need to have answered. Is your
problem that important? I'd argued that it is not for most of the time. The same
is true for walking up to someone's desk without invitation.

I'm an advocate of asynchronous communication, like chat, because it puts
establishes a buffer in the communication that enables every participant to
communication _in their own time_. They can decide when to read chat messages
because they can turn of notification and find the time that fits them to answer
questions there.

There is nothing wrong with using phone-calls or video-chats for **planned
meetings**. It's essential for the wellbeing of an organization to hear your
colleagues voices and synchronous communication should be your choice for all
your recurring meetings like the daily, jour fixes or other sync-up style
meetings.

So it's not the technology that is bad but the implications they bear: phone
calls are expected to be answered immediately, that puts some pressure on the
receiver. They are not bad per-se because the bandwidth depending on the topic
can be higher compared to chat or email.

## Make an escalation plan for communication

Phone calls might be an easy to use tool for the individual but bear a very
unbalanced cost for the team. It shouldn't be your first choice of communication
with your team.

Communication in a team needs to be well defined and agreed on organization
wide. I propose that chat should be the default way of communication internally.
You can replace email with a chat system that allows for private, topic based,
and general messaging. Your project management tool is the place to assign work
items. Email should be an interface only to clients and external contacts.

That leaves phone-calls for emergency situations. And you should handle them
like this. If you pick up the phone to call someone it should be an emergency.
You also should know which kind of problem qualifies for an emergency and which
are better added to the bug tracker.

If you are on the receiving end of a phone-call and it's not an emergency you
should know about the effect of immediately taking care of the issue. If you are
in a state of focus just ask the caller to let you call them back so you can
finish your current thought or bring your current work item to a state that
enables you to easily pick it up later. Give them a time frame and essentially
_schedule_ a call with them.

## Synchronous communication is expensive

â€¦ is the gist of this post. Separating myself voluntarily from my team by
working out of a [coworking space](http://www.die-zentrale-ffm.de/en/) at least
3 days a week and reducing _unplanned_ phone calls to a minimum is important for
my personal happiness at work. I even try to cluster meetings around two days a
week so I have the other three days for work that feels more productive to
me-like coding.

I hope you have enough reasons to make your organization default to asynchronous
communication if you have the power to do so.
