---
title: >-
  There is no working time flexibility during vacation
abstract: |
  If not for yourself, you owe it to your peers to be a good example by not executing  your working time flexibility during your vacation.
date: 2015-12-03
---

If you take your work seriously you also need to do this for your vacation.
Vacations are an important factor for your overall ability to generate value.
Their purpose is to _recharge your batteries_–for knowledge workers this means
taking your mind off work so that your brain can process the things you have
learned about the challenges at hand, build the connections, and identify the
patterns that emerge. After returning from your vacation you have taken several
_virtual_ steps back and can assess your work from a new perspective. This will
enable you to find better solutions for the projects you are working on and
enable you to do your best eventually.

**It is therefore that you lose your working time flexibility during vacation.**

I am an absolute advocate of personal freedom as part of your position which
includes the ability to chose when and where you work. This means that I don't
care _when_ a coworkers is working–as long as they are not doing overtime. And
this is the crucial point. I am obliged to ensure that my coworkers' working
hours during the week don't exceed the agreed-upon limit. By doing checkings in
during vacation, completing little tasks, being ready to take calls, coworkers
on vacation are sending a signal to everyone in the company that it is O.K. to
be _available_ 24/7. **It is not.**

There is the argument, that an experienced coworker who is very well
self-organized is mature enough to know about the balance between work and
not-work and that they are very well equipped to handle smaller tasks during
vacation without the blink of an eye. I'd doubt that. But what is even more
important is that there are usually far more coworkers that are not yet able to
manage themselves to their best. They will see this behaviour not as an
expression of great self-management skills but take it for _what it looks on the
outside_: that it is O.K. to work all the time.

If not for yourself, you owe it to your peers to be a good example by not
executing your working time flexibility during your vacation.

_Happy holidays!_
