---
title: >-
  An Everyone Culture
abstract: |
  Book review of An Everyone Culture by Robert Kegan and Lisa Laskow Lahey
date: 2016-09-10T16:00:00.000Z
---

In [An Everyone Culture][1] the authors [Robert Kegan and Lisa Laskow Lahey][2]
explore _Deliberately Developmental Organizations_ (DDOs).

In these organizations _adult development_ is part of the core business model:
they don't invest into the personal development of their employees because they
_must_ but because they believe that there is a fundamental different concept of
the employee: they are part of the organization _with all their warts_. The idea
is: in many organizations a lot of effort is invested into appearing to be
perfect or flawless, to cover up ones insecurities and to cover for others
insecurities ("I let you get through with _this_ because you will do the same
for me on another occasion"). The authors call this _having a second, unpaid
job_. How organizations where able to eliminite this second, unpaid job by
bringing your full self to work in order to work on your shortcomings on company
time is explained with a lot of real-life examples.

You get to look inside three organizations from completely different industries:
movie-theaters / real estate, hedge fund managament, and IT. You get to
experience working in such an environment basically from a first person view and
are taken directly into real situations. All have one astounding similarity in
common: these organizations have created a safe environment to be yourself and
be open about your problems. They go even so far to make them publically
available for everyone in the organization to look up. And this is the crucial
part: creating a nurturing and helpful environment is not easy to build, and it
changes the understanding of what _being at work_ means so radically, that it
does not fit everybody. Constantly working on yourself, personally and
professionally, is nothing everybody is able to do. But the results are
fascinating; they are only postive in this book, though.

The second important concept in the book is the removal of professional
seniority. The idea that one can keep working in your job basically forever is
discarded. Which makes perfectly sense today because of two things: no job role
will be there forever and not change, things you've learned two years ago are
soon outdated. But more important the longer you do a job the less creative and
open you are for new and better ideas and change. In DDOs, as soon as you master
your current role you are rotated to a coaching role for this position and after
that assigned to a new role where you start over _as a newbie_. And this is true
for every job in those organizations not only for those employees that want to
work like this anyway. This creates a constant influx of new ideas in all parts
of the organization and enabled the three examples in the book to become
respected industry leaders.

I've taken away a lot of new ideas about how organizations can be run, and
learned how attractive personal development in the context of your organization
can be and that the benefits are bigger then I would have estimated.

This book is also a great example for the saying "Culture eats strategy for
breakfast": no strategy can deal with crisis like a team where everybody knows
everyones shortcomings and how to work with them.

Highly recommended!

[1]: https://www.amazon.de/dp/1625278624/ref=cm_sw_r_tw_dp_x_Zrb1xbW37FWHT
[2]: http://mindsatwork.com/who-we-are/
