---
subtitle: Talk
title:
  "Software Quality made this talk happen: push-to-deploy as the means to deal
  with uncertainty"
abstract: >
  This talk is an encouragement for developers to trust their skills and tools,
  but also invest in mastering them.
date: 2024-05-16T13:30:00.000Z
---

I was first paid to write software in 1997, now 27 years ago, and if there is
one skill that had the biggest impact on my career then it’s the ability to
deliver working software that doesn’t break. This allows me to take vacation,
invest back into my communities and initiatives that I want to support,
self-development, and to have time for self-, and family care.

In this talk I want to reinforce your love for software quality by sharing how I
helps me in my day to day work where I balance my efforts between too many
projects but still manage to be both and innovative software engineer, and
deliver solutions that do not break when it matters most through setting up all
projects and teams that I work with around one main principle: push-to-deploy.

In order to achieve this, confidence is needed, which can only manifest if we
know that our changes will not break the system. And in an environment that
becomes more and more uncertain and volatile every day, there is only one
solution that has stood the test of time: writing tests first. And its beauty,
especially with outside-in-test-driven-development, is that it helps to keep the
focus on delivering value to the end-user. Over the last years I have added
Behavior-driven development to my quality toolbox because it decouples the
implementation of the tests from the implementation of the application. Testing
through the public API of a system ensures that there are no unexpected changes
for the user.

As I will share, I have a strict focus on user stories when building our
products, because it is the only way that ensures that all stakeholders can
participate and contribute to a product. Because in the end a successful
software is always built in collaboration with people who contribute source-code
and those who contribute in other ways.

Enabling the collaboration of all stakeholders is a very important part of my
job, and I have been able to achieve this through using a walking skeleton
approach: delivering working minimal products from the first day. This way
developers like me can make sure to be involved in the discussion with product
people and customers early on in a projects' life-cycle. And in my experience
only the real product (and not even a click dummy) will truly create shared
understanding with all stakeholders. Because time is always short and we know
that every prototype ends up in production we have to make sure that even our
prototypes are of high quality; which is where using quality in software
development to achieve continuous delivery (CD) with confidence - really shine.

The slides are available
[here](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1ZrrTc4YdN0C23C1GOXilOaD4eCfsplYO/view?usp=sharing).
