---
title: >-
  TopConf Linz 2016
abstract: |
  Impressions from my first tech conference as a speaker.
date: 2016-02-03T18:00:00.000Z
---

I'm just returning from [TopConf Linz 2016](http://topconf.com/linz-2016/) which
was my first tech conference that I visited as a speaker. I do have
[quite some speaking](https://coderbyheart.com/#talks) experience but with
shorter talks, usually around 15 minutes, and in front of an audience that does
not pay to attend the event. With a ticket price of €220 this conference is no
where near your usual €1,500+ that some of the bigger conferences call up but
still, not a _free_ event. I did visit some similar priced conferences in the
past, like the [mindblowing SoCraTes](./the-magic-of-socrates-conference) or the
[APIDays](http://apidays.io/) so I do also have made some experiences how
awesome conference could be. TopConf unfortunately does not fully live up to its
name.

They did manage to create a really interesting and to some extent diverse
program with one workshop day and eight talk tracks during two days. The
speakers that I saw were experienced, very well prepared and very enjoyable.
What I especially liked: never marketing a specific product or solution. The
location was technically top notch regarding audio and presentation equipment.
Unfortunately the WiFi was non-existent. I wasn't even able to connect to it the
whole day, so I had to buy a roaming data pass to be able to tweet-which I enjoy
a lot. For me this is even more important in order to connect with other
attendees after the event is over. Having no working WiFi resulted in a very low
volume of tweets for the events hashtag
[#TopConfAT](https://twitter.com/search?q=%23TopConfAT) and basically no use of
the mobile conference app which had dedicated functionality for interacting with
other attendees during the conference. But given this is the first time for the
TopConf to take place at this location it is something they are not to blame
for.

Where I can't be that forgiving is the catering. I have never experienced
something similar. What began with the absence of breakfast (the conference
opened at 9am) and coffee only being available after the first talks were over
ended in the evening with dinner in the form of hamburgers and cheeseburgers
from McDonalds. This is probably the most braindead catering option to be found,
yet they failed to take care of the attendees for whom meat is not a proper
meal. This is simply rude and non-inclusive.

In the end I still enjoyed attending TopConf because I got to practice my
speaking (and also got to make some stupid mistakes myself doing so) and had the
chance to meet great and interesting people. The TopConf staff always was very
friendly and caring. The problems I've pointed out are easy to fix so I'll
probably apply to speak again next year …
