---
title: >-
  Turn Your Ship Around!
subtitle: >-
  Book review
abstract: |
  The workbook to implement intent-based leadership in your organization
  is as concrete as it gets for books that promise changing your organization
  for the better.
date: 2016-12-27T10:00+02:00
---

![Turn Your Ship Around! by L. David Marquet](../media/turn-your-ship-around.jpg)

[_Turn Your Ship Around!_](http://amzn.to/2hjslhx) by [L. David Marquet][dm] is
as concrete as it gets for books that promise changing your organization for the
better.

Based on the famous book about his tour on the nuclear submarine USS Santa Fee,
where Marquet faced the challenge of his career of becoming the commanding
officer on the worst performing ship in the entire US Navy but managed to turn
it into the best performing within two years, the workbook lays out concrete
exercises to implement what Marquet developed: intent-based leadership.

## Intent-based leadership

The method is essentially a helper to codify behavioral change throughout an
entire organization. By making decisions observable by others it enables the
transfer of decision making power to &quot;lower&quot; levels; which is what you
want in any complex and complicated environment today. By _pushing authority to
information_, as Marquet calls it, decisions are made where they need to be
made: where and when the action happens, and not many layers distant from it.

The idea is simple: to have **leaders on every level**, even at levels where
individuals are not used to lead. Obviously this skill is not inherently
existent everywhere in the organization so Marquet lays out the ideas and
concepts to equip them with mechanisms of _Control_ (put them in control of
their actions and results), _Competence_ (give the the technical knowledge to
make the right decisions), and _Clarity_ (give the the understanding of the
organization's purpose).

You will get more than two dozen exercises that can be executed in a few minutes
and yield material for your team right away. The book is so applicable, that no
trainer is need, and there are companies that just by following the book, have
saved hundreds of million $.

It not only tackles the common decision fatigue in organizations where it's more
important to not make an error then to make a bold move but makes you discover
invisible red-tape, which alone are potentially limiting your ability to
innovate and create compelling products.

The most important aspect of intent-based leadership in my opinion is that it
establishes deliberate learning towards a common goal which enables
organizations to grow and become truly agile.

[dm]:
  http://www.davidmarquet.com/?utm_source=coderbyheart&utm_medium=blogpost&utm_campaign=turn-your-ship-around
