---
title: >-
  Your team needs a vision and common values to succeed
abstract: |
  Having a vision and a set of values will empower your team and remove a lot of potential for misunderstandings from  your day to day interaction within your team. This helps them to focus on their work instead of arguing about it and  build momentum because it removes uncertainties about what should be done.
date: 2015-09-06T21:54:00.000Z
---

During this year's Socrates Conference[¹](./the-magic-of-socrates-conference) I
attended a session that questioned the importantance of
techology[²](https://twitter.com/coderbyheart/status/637279996717998081) for the
overall success of projects&mdash;and I agree. Technology is just a tool, that
can be replaced easily and has usually mo major influence in the project
success. If your tech stack is built with robustness and modern software
development principles in mind
(S.O.L.I.D.[³](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SOLID_(object-oriented_design)>),
Domain Driven Design[⁴](https://domainlanguage.com/ddd/), Tell don't
ask[⁵](https://pragprog.com/articles/tell-dont-ask), Hypermedia System
Architecture[⁶](http://amzn.to/1WUCfH7)) you'll end up with software whose
implementation can in part or in total easily be replaced by any other
technology. It is therefore the people in your project that are vital for the
long-term success. They cannot be replaced because changing only one team member
will change the entire
team[⁷](https://hbr.org/2013/12/the-hidden-benefits-of-keeping-teams-intact).
But keeping your team intact and everyone committed to doing exceptional work
requires the establishment of two things:

1. a **vision** that is well understood and provides clear guidelines for
   measuring the success in achieving it
2. a shared set of **values** with clear examples of how these values affect the
   daily work.

Only if these two things are given, a team can act truly _agile_, meaning that
each team member can assess if their actions are contributing towards the vision
and ensure that the way they solve their current task will be acceptable in the
project's scope.

The process of defining a good vision and especially of finding common values is
hard but in my opionen should be undertaken immidiately when you start your
project&mdash;or startup&mdash;and re-evaluated everytime the the team changes.

## What is a good vision?

Embracing agile principles means that you want your team members to be able to
push forward and decide _on their own_ which part of the project needs their
contribution. They should think like an entrepreneur and this needs their
understanding of the overall goal. This is where a vision works as a guide
because it can answer this simple question:

> If I do this, will it take us closer to reaching our vision?

A good vision inherently provides an answer to this question because it
describes what goal should be reached, by which action and how to know when the
goal is achieved. It is important to stress that the vision needs to be clear
and well understood amongst your team members. Otherwise it will create
confusion and in the worst case confliction actions will be taken.

Just compare these two real-world examples from two companies I know:

> We develop digital solutions, which suit people’s needs and thus help make
> their lives easier.[⁸](https://www.triplesensereply.de/en/)

or

> Developers use our service to easily build, deploy, and manage their
> containerized services as well as collaborate on and share their architecture
> templates.[⁹](https://giantswarm.io/about/)

Where the first example is just a hollow promise to deliver everything the
customer asks for the second example provides a much more detailed explanation
of what the core business is and tells about the deciding factors when measuring
their success.

## What are values?

Having a vision is important not only because it provides guidance for your team
members every day but also provides identity which helps to attract new talent
and give new hires a clear scope for their work. It is equally important to
provide and answers this question:

> Is it ok to do it this way?

Where the _vision_ provides guidance for the _What do we do?_ _values_ provide
guidance for the _How do we do it?_ which has even more potential for conflict.
In an environment where failure is part of the process it is critical for all
parties to understand why something is a failure. If your team has misalinged
values it might be seen as failure by one person to rush out a software release
without proper testing (_better safe than sorry_) where the other person might
think of this as taking an acceptable risk (_speed over safety_). Both can be
totally acceptably behaviours on their own but are conflicting in the same
context.

## What are good values?

If you don't provide _values_ as well, you create room for frustration. Like a
good vision good values not only are easily understandable but also provide
clear guidance for acceptable behaviour. They are much more individual to the
team and should be established by the whole team. There are some exceptional
good examples to get you started, like The 10 Buffer
Values[¹⁰](https://buffer.com/about), Zappos Core
Values[¹¹](https://jobs.zappos.com/life-at-zappos).

## tl;dr

Having a vision and a set of values will empower your team and remove a lot of
potential for misunderstandings from your day to day interaction within your
team. This helps them to focus on their work instead of arguing about it and
build momentum because it removes uncertainties about what should be done. This
invest is something you should consider making.
