---
subtitle: "42 first principles"
title: "Privilege"
abstract:
  A reflection on my principles is not possible without acknowledging my
  privileges
date: 2022-01-12T00:00:00.000Z
---

[![Snowflake: Principle](../../media/42-first-principles/snowflake-privilege.svg)](https://coderbyheart.github.io/snowflake/#77:222,231:110,327:288,339:21,445:95,489:89)

There are thousands of publications that aim to provide a concrete step by step
guide to teach you how to improve _X_. That is not my goal for writing down my
principles. It's merely an attempt to create an inventory of the _unwritten_
rules that influence me daily. Through reading them you will get a better
understanding of me, and maybe, hopefully, also gain some helpful ideas for your
daily work as a human working with other humans, earning their living through
collaborating with others humans on coercing machines into providing more value
than pain.

<https://twitter.com/yodifiji/status/1480702460465451016?embed>

I've been given the privilege to very early discover that I could turn my
fascination with computers into a job. Already as a teenager, I was able to find
the application for my interest in helping local non-profits, political parties
and companies in my hometown to make their first digital steps. In 1998, at the
age of 17, I started my first business, creating dynamic websites in HTML4 and
PHP3 &mdash; which was possible because I had access to dial up internet since
around 1996 when AOL launched in Germany; since the launch of DSL in 1999 I had
uninterrupted access to relatively fast, and stable internet connectivity.

Still today, access to the internet and a computer is not ubiquitous. I had this
privilege from the moment I developed and interest to become involved with it,
and with that access around the clock, whenever I wanted, I could learn, try,
repeat.

I have the privilege to be a German, white, male, and in my career so far have
always perceived others to welcome and respect me as a member of their cause,
colleague or collaborator. When I received pushback or met obstacles I always
was (made) aware how to overcome them and had access to the resources to do so.
I usually managed to achieve my goals and, where I failed, the luxury to leave a
pointless professional relationship.

I am free of kids, which gives a tremendous amount of additional resources to
invest in my skills (like writing this blog post). I never needed to reduce the
level of commitment to my career because of children.

## My privileges are many, and I greatly benefited from them.

In knowing my privileges, and respecting the opportunities they have given me, I
thrive to treat others _not_ as equals, because very few had the same privileges
as me. But I aim to use my skills, experience, and resources to their best
impact in our relationship.

> This post is part of the [42 first principles](/42-first-principles) series.
